Restructure Security chapter (#1359)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/security/enabling-security.adoc

---
title: Enabling Security
description: Learn how to enable and configure security in a Vaadin Flow application using the built-in security helpers with Spring Boot.
order: 10
layout: page
---

= Securing Spring Boot Applications

Vaadin is fully compatible with the most-popular security solutions in the Java ecosystem, including but not limited to Spring Security, JAAS, and Apache Shiro.

> And while you can choose the security framework you want to use, Vaadin Flow comes with built-in security helpers that are most convenient to implement with Spring Security.
> Using those built-in helpers with Spring Security makes it easier, faster, and safer to secure your Vaadin applications than if you were to take use of the Spring Security framework directly, or if you were to use another security framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And although you can choose the security framework you want to use, Vaadin Flow comes with built-in security helpers that are most convenient to implement with Spring Security.
Using these built-in helpers with Spring Security makes it easier, faster, and safer to secure your Vaadin applications than if you were use the Spring Security framework directly, or if you were to use another security framework.

```

For instructions on using the built-in helpers in non-Spring projects, see this <<{articles}/flow/security/advanced-topics/securing-plain-java-app#, separate chapter>>.

== Introduction

In a Spring Boot application, Vaadin Flow built-in security helpers enable a view-based access control mechanism with minimum Spring Security configurations.
This view-based access control mechanism enables you to fully secure views in Vaadin Flow applications in a flexible way, based on different access level annotations.
Specifically, the view-based access control mechanism uses the [annotationname]`@AnonymousAllowed`, [annotationname]`@PermitAll`, [annotationname]`@RolesAllowed`, and [annotationname]`@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.

To enable the mechanism in a Vaadin Flow Spring Boot application without any security, add the following to the project (if they do not exist already):

- A Login view.
- Spring Security dependencies.
- Log-out capability.
- A security configuration class that extends [classname]`VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.

> - Annotate the view classes with the [annotationname]`@AnonymousAllowed`, [annotationname]`@PermitAll`, or [annotationname]`@RolesAllowed` annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Annotate the view classes with the [annotationname]`@AnonymousAllowed`, [annotationname]`@PermitAll`, or [annotationname]`@RolesAllowed` annotations.

```

Author: @dougjewsbury Why remove the bullet point before this sentence? It is intended to be one of the steps needed to enable the mechanism in a Flow app.

Reviewer: It was just for grammatical reasons. The list of steps is introduced with "add the following to the project", so "Annotate the classes..." doesn't really fit in. Perhaps you could change "add the following to the project" by "perform these steps", and then insert "Add..." into the steps that require it?

Author: I see. I just made a change that keeps "add the following to the project" as it is, and changes the last step to "One of the following annotations on each view class: [annotationname]`@AnonymousAllowed`, [annotationname]`@PermitAll`, or [annotationname]`@RolesAllowed`."

    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if(beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()
            .getQueryParameters()
            .getParameters()
            .containsKey("error")) {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }
}
----

.Usage of Vaadin's Login Form component
[NOTE]
In this example, we use Vaadin's Login Form component for the sake of brevity in this implementation.
However, there is no obligation to do so; feel free to implement your own log-in view, as you wish.

== Spring Security Dependencies

To enable Spring Security, there are certain dependencies that should be added to the project.
_As this guide is based on Spring Boot, we recommend adding the following dependency_:

.Spring Boot Starter Security dependency that should be added to the [filename]#pom.xml# file:
[source,XML]
----
<dependencies>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-security</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
</dependencies>
----

== Log-Out Capability

To handle log-out in web applications, one typically uses a log-out button.

> Here is a basic implementation of log-out button shown on the header of the main layout:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a basic implementation of a log-out button shown on the header of the main layout:

```
